# Beau of the Fifth Column
siiky
2023/02/21
2023/02/21
2023/02/21
channel,society,politics,history

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/channel/UC0YvoAYGgdOfySQSLcxtu1w

A YouTube channel about news, politics, and, occasionally, the environment.

## Let's talk about UBI, McDonald's, prisons, and radical ideas....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=qmaLRP65c0o

Video about UBI. Precursor to the following.

## Let's talk about UBI and living wages....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=1ZADrnNuiPk

Video where he argues against the point that if people are given the minimum monetary means of subsistence then they wouldn't bother working at all.

His counter-argument is that, in the US, college students don't take thousands of dollars in debt for nothing. If they would be content with the minimum monetary means of subsistence (i.e. minimum wage), then there would be no point in taking that debt and going to college.

Has a similar message to [[The Success Paradox]].

## Let's talk about buying a gun because of fear of political violence....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=Yv-0OQ8KSkM

While a shooting's "grouping" is a good measure of accuracy, that's not necessarily a good measure of survivalistic shooting. "There's no point in shooting the same tissue twice."

The first time shooting without ear protections shouldn't be in a real situation. Because of the loud noise of the gun, it can be surprising, scary, disorienting, ... The first time should be in a controlled environment, so you're not surprised (in a bad way) if you happen to be in a real scenario.

He recommends getting something used by the military because, since the military accepts just about anybody, the weapons must be easy to use by anybody.

## Let's talk about teaching techniques....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=r5j6-JgegR8

Follow-up to the above.

The person who asked for advice in that video ended up being trained by a ex-Mossad agent.

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Mossad

## Let's talk about a UBI study....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=EH83zaWikI4

Video about an UBI study.

The study samples a large group of people given 500$/month and what they spend it on. 40% food; 24% Walmart/&c; 16% healthcare, insurance, drugs, &c; 11% utilities (electricity, water, &c); 9% auto-repair and gas.

This is supposed to be empirical evidence that people, given UBI, would make something useful out of it, instead of wasting it on crap.

The observer paradox is a thing! Did the subjects of study not know they were being studied? There's a SpongeBob episode representing this, where Sandy wants to study SpongeBob and Pratick and tries to film them.

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Observer's_paradox

## Let's talk about my son's questions about Christmas cards....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=007h2thmT5U

Video about Christmas postcards.

> Tradition is peer-pressure from dead people.

> And you know, just because we always did something one way isn't a reason to continue doing it that way if a better option presents itself.

Based on estimates Beau found online: One tree produces about 3000 Christmas postcards. In the US they send about 1.3 billion Christmas postcards per year. Including envelopes and whatnot that's about 500000 trees.

Which "billion" is he using? What kind of tree? What size? How old?

## Let's talk about understanding social media influence operations....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=cQcxHvAxrzQ

Video about "social media" and influence operations, and how TikTok is "the perfect platform" for this.

Talks about Kurdistan at 4m36s:

> I am of the firm belief that the only reason the United States always stops one step short of helping the Kurdish people gain independence is because the Kurdish people are spread out across a number of hot spot countries, which means they always have that organic movement that they can tap into.

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Kurdish%E2%80%93Turkish_conflict
=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Kurdish%E2%80%93Turkish_conflict_(1978%E2%80%93present)

## Let's talk about planting ourselves....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=XzXdDV38zjA

Video from 2023/01/07 about being used for compost after death.

## Let's talk about why they can't fix their country....

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=mhlAEqf39Sg

Video about shit the US has done in the past in Latin American countries.

## Videos in need of some rewatching and transcribing

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=VURKY-447dk
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=sS2pJwzCjJM
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=dKV8yXqoKiM
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=sqUJlSCtF2Y
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=mp_wnxdVLZI
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=MX4Qyb2i2q8
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=wIJIrR8nk2A
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=02IkL4qjgv0
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=3N8MWVg7u84
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=0fK_KdcaCN8
