# Marie Dubremetz, "Consulting for digital humanists"
siiky
2023/02/05
2023/02/05
2023/02/05
talk

=> https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/consulting_for_digital_humanists
=> https://fosdem.org/2023/schedule/event/consulting_for_digital_humanists/attachments/slides/5708/export/events/attachments/consulting_for_digital_humanists/slides/5708/ConsultingForHumanits_2.pdf
=> https://www.mariedubremetz.com
=> https://cl.lingfil.uu.se/~marie

Her site seems to be down?

Lightning talk about her experience working as a programmer for humanities acadamics researchers.

I found this bit funny:
> I've been asked in conferences to give PowerPoint (pptx) files, and Word documents, and no one gets offended by that.

According to her, there's this general difference between programmers and humanists.

Programmers:
* Mostly male
* Programmer-like programs and tools -- Linux/Max, LaTeX, terminals, ...
* Influenced by the industry (in terms of jobs) -- salary, practices, ...
* Broad (commercial) topics
* Metrics oriented -- quantified performance, speed, memory, ...

Humanists:
* Female/mixed audience
* Point-and-click programs and tools, and often proprietary -- Windows/Mac, PowerPoint, Word, ...
* Academic job culture
* Scarce data, niche topics
* Question oriented

Asking the right question as engineer, when analyzing a possible project:
* Context: what is you domain? what does this domain focus on?
* What is the problem you try to solve?
* (Eventually) what did you already try to solve syour problem? What tools did you use?
* What are the data you have (or hope to collect)?
* Can you present me your data? Size, format, how has it been collected?
