# The Conversation, Morten Fibieger Byskov, Jeroen Hopster, Júlia Isern Bennassar, "A new climate law in the Balearic Islands will protect the wellbeing of present and future generations - if such thing can be defined"
siiky
2023/08/29
2023/08/29
2023/08/29
post,politics,environment,society,climate

=> https://theconversation.com/a-new-climate-law-in-the-balearic-islands-will-protect-the-wellbeing-of-present-and-future-generations-if-such-thing-can-be-defined-209946

> Crucially, the law demands the creation of a Commission to safeguard the wellbeing of present and future generations, particularly in the face of climate change.
> (...)
> This law is unique in Spain, though not in Europe: it follows the precedent set by the Wales Act of 2015, which similarly focuses on the objectives of wellbeing and the creation of a commission that oversees a long-term perspective on policy-making.

But what is "wellbeing"?

> One of the initial challenges faced by the proposed Commission in the Balearic Islands is that of balancing the interests of future and present generations. Protecting the wellbeing of future generations will likely mean imposing certain restrictions on those presently alive. Such restrictions should take into account that safeguarding the wellbeing of present generations is an equally important part of the Commission’s task.
>
> This is in keeping with the idea of what is known as a just transition – the idea that a societal shift towards climate neutrality can only be regarded as a success if it is also a transition towards a fairer society, where no-one is left behind.

> Not only would this strengthen the democratic basis of the law, it would also ensure that the first-hand experiences of climate vulnerable people and communities, who face the threat of climate change in their daily lives, are included. This would result in fairer, more responsive, and more sustainable climate policies and plans.

"Strengthen the democratic basis of the law" -- how is that useful or good in any way if democratically the wrong path is chosen?

And how does the "democratic basis" relate to "more sustainable climate policies"?
