# Scheme (programming language)
siiky
2023/02/06
2023/02/28
2023/02/28
programming,scheme

=> https://www.scheme.org

## Some implementations

=> pl.chicken.gmi CHICKEN Scheme
=> https://synthcode.com/wiki/chibi-scheme Chibi Scheme
=> https://haltp.org/posts/owl.html Owl Lisp
=> https://www.gnu.org/software/guile Guile Scheme
=> https://github.com/yuriy-chumak/ol Otus Lisp

=> http://community.schemewiki.org/?scheme-faq-standards
=> https://wingolog.org/archives/2013/01/07/an-opinionated-guide-to-scheme-implementations an opinionated guide to scheme implementations

## My projects

### ipfs

A Kubo RPC client library. Made a Lua port as well.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/ipfs.scm
=> https://wiki.call-cc.org/eggref/5/ipfs
=> ../projects/ipfs.gmi
=> pl.lua.gmi

### disjoint-set

An imperative implementation of Disjoin Sets based on Scheme vectors.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/disjoin-set
=> https://wiki.call-cc.org/eggref/5/disjoint-set
=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Disjoint-set_data_structure Disjoint sets

### gmi

A Gemtext reader/writer. Made a Lua port as well.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/gmi.scm
=> https://wiki.call-cc.org/eggref/5/gmi
=> ../projects/gemtext.gmi
=> pl.lua.gmi

### transmission

A Transmission RPC client.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/transmission.scm
=> https://wiki.call-cc.org/eggref/5/transmission

### daemon

A convenience procedure to run some Scheme code in a process in the background -- or not!

=> https://wiki.call-cc.org/eggref/5/daemon
=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/daemon

### alist-let

A macro similar to let that can be used to destructure alists. In experimental stage still. First iteration ever was from the transmission egg.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/alist-let

### ttltbl

A TTL table/dictionary -- i.e. a cache.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/ttltbl.scm

### gminid

My fork of Kooda's geminid, and a Gemini IPFS gateway.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/geminid
=> ../projects/gemini-ipfs-gateway.gmi Gemini IPFS gateway

### poset

Experiments in POSets visualization.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/poset

### trmote

A few utility programs based on the transmission egg to help manage a Transmission instance -- especially transmission-update-seed-priority and transmission-verify!

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/trmote

### cling

This is a Command Line INterface Generator. I like the idea and the functionality I managed to program in, and kinda like the usability, but I don't like at all how it's implemented. It's ugly af, and that's the only reason I haven't published it as an egg yet.

Used by trmote and a few of my other unpublished eggs.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/cling

### invidious

Invidious API client.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/invidious.scm

### ivp

Search and play videos and playlists from Invidious without leaving your terminal! Based on invidious and cling.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/ivp

### gvs

GraphViz Extension Language for Scheme.

=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/gvs

## Ideas

### IPC Scheme Port

A module to help Scheme processes to communicate with each other in Scheme through ports (pipes or not).

=> https://api.call-cc.org/5/doc/chicken/process/create-pipe create-pipe
=> https://api.call-cc.org/5/doc/chicken/port/make-input-port make-input-port
=> https://api.call-cc.org/5/doc/chicken/port/make-output-port make-output-port
=> https://api.call-cc.org/5/doc/chicken/port/make-bidirectional-port make-bidirectional-port
=> https://api.call-cc.org/5/doc/chicken/port/set-buffering-mode%21 set-buffering-mode!
