# "Assembly Language Programming with ARM – Full Tutorial for Beginners"
siiky
2023/05/04
2023/05/04
2023/05/04
video,course,programming

=> https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/learn-assembly-language-programming-with-arm/
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=gfmRrPjnEw4

Short-ish freecodecamp video about ARM assembly.

## Notes

Registers R0 through R12, SP (Stack Pointer), LR (Link Register?), PC (Program Counter). R7 is used to specify syscalls. CPSR contains arithmetic flags (Negative, Carry, Zero, &c).

The different types of addressing:

* Immediate -- values are prefixed with # -- e.g. #42 for the decimal number 42, or #0xAB for the hexadecimal number AB.
* Register direct addressing -- the name of the register by itself.
* Direct -- labels are prefixed with = -- e.g. =somedata for the address of the label somedata.
* Indirect register addressing -- the register name is surrounded by square brackets -- e.g. [R3]; optionally an offset may be specified.
* Pre-increment -- like "register indirect addressing", but additionally everything is suffixed with ! -- e.g. [R2,#4]!
* Post-increment -- like "register indirect addressing", but the offset is specified outside -- e.g. [R2],#4

Common instructions:

* MOV DST, SRC -- move, duh
* SWI X -- Software Interrupt -- what's X?
* LDR REG, =ADDR -- load an address into a register
* ADD DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- DST = SRC1 + SRC2
* SUB DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- DST = SRC1 - SRC2
* MUL DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- DST = SRC1 * SRC2
* ADDS DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- like the operations above, but also set the right flags in the CPSR register
* SUBS DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- like the operations above, but also set the right flags in the CPSR register
* MULS DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- like the operations above, but also set the right flags in the CPSR register
* ADC DSR, SRC1, SRC2 -- like ADD, but also adds the carry from CPSR
* AND DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- binary AND, e.g. 0xFF & 0x16 = 0x16
* ORR DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- binary OR, e.g. 0xFF | 0x16 = 0xFF
* EOR DST, SRC1, SRC2 -- binary XOR, e.g. 0xFF ^ 0x16 = 0xE9
* MVN DST, SRC -- binary NOT, e.g. ~0xFF = 0xFFFFFF00 (negates the whole register, of course)
* LSL REG, #IM -- logical left shift
* LSR REG, #IM -- logical right shift
* ROR REG, #IM -- right rotation
* MOV DST, SRC, LSL #IM -- save in DST the result of shifting SRC left #IM
* MOV DST, SRC, LSR #IM -- save in DST the result of shifting SRC right #IM
* CMP REG1, REG2 -- compare the values of two registers by computing REG1-REG2
* BGT LBL -- jump if greater-than (Branch Greater-Than)
* BGE LBL -- jump if greater-or-equal (Branch Greater-or-Equal)
* BLT LBL -- jump if lesser-than (Branch Lesser-Than)
* BLE LBL -- jump if greater-or-equal (Branch Greater-or-Equal)
* BEQ LBL -- jump if equal (Branch EQual)
* BNE LBL -- jump if not equal (Branch Not Equal)
* BAL LBL -- jump (Branch ALways? Branch And Link?)
* B LBL -- Branch?
* ADDLT DST, SRC -- compute DST += SRC if the last comparison was lesser-than
* MOVEQ DST, SRC -- DST = SRC if the last comparison was equal
* BL LBL -- Branch Linked ("call"?)
* BX REG -- Branch eXit? Usually called on LR
* PUSH {REG, ...} -- push values onto the stack; e.g. PUSH {R0, R2, R3}
* POP {REG, ...} -- pop values off the stack; e.g. POP {R0, R2, R3}
* STR SRC, DST -- store the value of SRC in DST

```s
.global _start
_start:
	MOV R0,=somedata // Save in R0 the address of somedata

	LDR R1,[R0] // Save in R1 the value stored at the address that's stored in R0 -- equivalent to R1 = *R0

	LDR R2,[R0,#4] // Save in R2 the value stored at the address that's stored in R0, plus 4 bytes -- equivalent to R2 = *(R0+4)

	LDR R3,[R0,#4]! // Save in R2 the value stored at the address that's stored in R0, plus 4 bytes -- equivalent to R3 = *(++R0) (assume ++ increments 4 bytes)

	LDR R4,[R0],#4 // Save in R2 the value stored at the address that's stored in R0, plus 4 bytes -- equivalent to R4 = *(R0++) (assume ++ increments 4 bytes)

	MOV R7,#1 // 1 is the exit syscall code
	SWI 0

.data
somedata:
	.word 4,2
```

### Procedure calls

```s
.global _start
_start:
	MOV R0, #1
	MOV R1, #3
	PUSH {R0, R1}
	BL get_value
	POP {R0, R1}
	B end

get_value:
	MOV R0, #5
	MOV R1, #7
	ADD R2, R0, R1
	BX LR

end:
```

## First program

Actually wrote it before the video went into loops, with this exact example. The code is very different though.

```s
.global _start
_start:
	LDR R0, =list // array ptr
	MOV R1, #1 // current index
	
	LDR R2, [R0] // sum
	
loop:
	LDR R3, [R0, #4]! // get value at current index and move array ptr forward
	ADD R2, R2, R3 // add current value to sum
	
	ADD R1, R1, #1 // increment index

	CMP R1, #10
	BLT loop // index < 10 ?


.data
list:
	.word 1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10
```

Should be roughly equivalent to the following:

```c
int main (void)
{
	int list[10] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10};
	int idx = 1;
	int sum = *list;
	int r3;

	do {
		r3 = *(++list);
		sum += r3;
		idx += 1;
	} while (idx < 10);

	return 0;
}
```

## First (runnable) program

```s
.global _start

_start:
        MOV R0, #1 // stdout
        LDR R1, =message
        LDR R2, =len
        MOV R7, #4 // 4 is the write syscall code
        SWI 0

        MOV R7, #1 // 1 is the exit syscall code
        SWI 0

.data
message:
        .asciz "hello world"
len = .-message
```

Roughly equivalent to the following:

```c
int main (void)
{
	const char msg[] = "hello world\n";
	write(1, msg, sizeof(msg));
	return 0;
}
```

## Constants

```s
.global _start
.equ endlist, 0xaaaaaaaa

_start:
// ...
```

## QEMU

At around 1h58min they show how to run an ARM VM in QEMU -- neat! Could be useful for other archs in the future.

## Compiling and linking

```sh
$ as foo.s -o foo.o
$ ld foo.o -o foo
```

## GDB

Starting at around 2h22min they show some useful GDB functionality I didn't know about.

```
# Show in a TUI the CPU instructions around the current PC
> layout asm

# Present in a TUI the register contents
> layout regs
```

<C-X><C-O> will jump between the GDB REPL and the other "windows".
