# Curriculum Vitae

|               |                            |
| :-----------: | :------------------------- |
| Name          | André Sá                   |
| Phone number  | +351969089204              |
| Email address | <silky.sa@gmail.com>       |
| GitHub        | <https://github.com/siiky> |

|            |                                  |
| :--------: | :------------------------------- |
| Portuguese | Native                           |
| English    | C1 (self-assessment)             |
| Japanese   | B1 (BabeliUM Language Institute) |

## Education

Currently studying Computer Science at Minho University. Relevant grades --
where applicable, (practical grade/exam grade/final grade):

 * Operating Systems (16/17/17) -- Study of POSIX (mostly UNIX) systems and
   implementation of crude parallel programs in C; the practical assignment
   consisted in developing a notebook processor (like Jupyter), that would
   execute the commands and embed the results in place;

 * Concurrent Programming (19/17.8/18) -- Classic concurrent and parallel
   programming with monitors/semaphores/locks in Java, and concurrent and
   distributed programming by message passing in Erlang; the practical
   assignment consisted in developing a multiplayer game (like hole.io), the
   client in Processing (Java) and the server in Erlang;

 * Computation Systems (12) -- Study of common computer architectures (x86),
   understanding assembly code generated by compiled C, differences between
   CISC and RISC;

 * Imperative Programming (13) -- Introduction to C and data structures in
   imperative programming languages;

## Work Experience

### Internship at Accenture (July of 2019)

My assigned job was developing unfinished features, aswell as new features, for
a consumer facing product. These features entailed working with Augmented
Reality in iOS. In the process, I've also learned about the Scrum framework.

\pagebreak

## Programming Languages

From University and personal projects, the languages that I have experience
with, enjoyed working with, and would like to work with again:

 * C
 * Scheme
 * Erlang
 * Haskell

From reading books, papers and blogs, the languages that I would like to learn:

 * Rust -- safe systems language, with an advanced type system;
 * Idris -- for refinement and dependent types;
 * Common Lisp -- for advanced metaprogramming and arbritary compile-time
   computation;

## Additional Information

### Events

I have participated in programming contests, such as Google Hash Code, Code
Jam, Kickstart, MIUP and Battle of Universities.

### Personal Projects

During my spare time I have developed personal projects and contributed to open
source projects. The most notable among them:

 * <https://github.com/siiky/star> -- A simple `tar` clone;
 * <https://github.com/siiky/c-utils> -- Generic data structures and utilities
   written in C, tested with QuickCheck-like tests;
 * <https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags> -- Found and fixed two
   `NULL`-dereference bugs;
 * <https://wiki.call-cc.org/eggref/5/cis> -- Found and reported a bug;

### Areas of Interest

I have a special interest in functional and distributed programming and in code
quality. I believe low-level and performance to be very important aspects of
programming and programming languages. Because of this, the languages that
caught my eyes most recently are CHICKEN Scheme and Rust.

I'm a proponent of the FLOSS movement and sharing of knowledge in general.
