# an interesting tiny nothing here

Random tiny thoughts that don't merit their own full-sized posts.

author: @siiky
license: CC BY-NC 4.0

## 2022-06-23 13:47 +0100
I use card-like pieces (train/subway tickets) as markers for places I want to transcribe or take notes from physical books, but I never write right away what the marker is for, so I forget often when it's time to type into Org Roam.
Yesterday I thought a teeny tiny A7 notebook per book may be a good alternative, and ~1yr ago I learned how to manually bind books -- very simple method, single-signature only, not at all polished: a single A4 sheet of paper cut into 4 A6 sheets, and each A6 sheet folded in half: 16 A7 pages of readily available paper estate! Just made one in ~10min: 2 holes at about 3cm from the top and bottom margin, thread with a needle 3/4 times, knot.
Has the downside of needing a pencil/pen at all times, but it's so slim it can be used as a book marker too.

## 2022-06-23 01:51 +0100
Wrote a oneliner to get a (I think valid) Gemfeed out of all my input files, ordered by the date each was last edited according to git log, complete with title and all -- the first line of all my files is the title, be they Markdown, Org, or Gemtext, and luckily for me the line starts with some sort of tag, some space, and then the title.
Here it is:
```
find */ -type f \( -iname '*.md' -or -iname '*.org' -or -iname '*.gmi' \) |
while read file; do
  # Get the last commit
  date="$(git log -1 -- "$file" |
    grep ^Date: |
    # Extract the year, month and day of the month
    sed 's|^Date:\s\+[A-Z][a-z]\{2\} \([A-Z][a-z]\{2\}\) \([0-9]\+\) \([0-9]\{2\}:[0-9]\{2\}\):[0-9]\{2\} \([0-9]\{4\}\) \([-+][0-9]\{4\}\)$|\4-\1-0\2|;' |
    # Git's outputted date doesn't 0-pad DoM, but I do on the bit above; e.g. 023 => 23; 07 => 07
    sed 's|0\([0-9]\{2\}\)$|\1|;' |
    sed 's|Jan|01|; s|Feb|02|; s|Mar|03|; s|Apr|04|; s|May|05|; s|Jun|06|; s|Jul|07|; s|Aug|08|; s|Sep|09|; s|Oct|10|; s|Nov|11|; s|Dec|12|;')"
  echo -e "$date\t$file"
done |
sort -nr |
while read date file; do
  # The sed command removes the formatting and spaces of the beginning of the line, leaving the title
  title="$(head -1 "$file" | sed 's|^[^ ]*[ ]*||;')"
  echo "=> $file $date - $title"
done
```
Fucking dope!

## 2022-06-22 20:21 +0100
Just some minutes ago, due to a conversation on #chicken, I realized why foldl and foldr evaluate to different values when using cons as the folder: cons is not associative! One of those things that's obvious but you never think about.

## 2022-06-22 20:19 +0100
Command to generate tinylog dates:
```
date +'%F %R %z'
```
To use with Vim:
```
r!date +'\%F \%R \%z'
```

## 2022-06-18 10:00 +0100
On the train reading a book realized why it is that aerobic organisms, like humans, have a significantly shorter life-span than anaerobic organisms, like trees. I had known for a long time that it's oxygen that ages us (we literally oxidate), just never made the connection before.
