# [H] Music [W] Music
siiky
2023/08/27
2023/08/27
en

Listening to my music collection on shuffle, "Paradigm" by Their Dogs Were Astronauts came up. I already know most of my collection, TDWA especially (<2017). Found them shortly after Animals as Leaders, many years ago, and have listened to them many times.

=> https://theirdogswereastronauts.bandcamp.com/track/paradigm Their Dogs Were Astronauts, "Earthkeeper", "Paradigm"

I knew immediatly what was going on once it started playing -- and not because I've listened so many times, it just happens; I can recognize most songs from the intro after two or three listenings. "Af this one, boring" -- 1-2 1-2 1-1-2 1-1-2 11-2 1-2 1-1-2 1-2 1231-2 ... It's been a long time I've listened to something new that's exciting! So much so I mentioned it in my tinylog 3 months ago. Still, there are songs, albums, bands that for whatever reason don't seem to grow old in me.

=> ../tinylog.gmi § 2023-05-21 23:41 +0100

## The gold

=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=_bpS-cOBK6Q Booker T. & the M.G.'s, "Green Onions"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=lyPvUIt_YWg Morbid Angel, "Covenant", "God of Emptiness"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=0MCCvY2oD2w Jimi Hendrix, "Axis: Bold as Love", "Castles Made of Sand"
=> https://yewtu.be/playlist?list=PLc60gkdW0bcFbUwumMvBpxVrFbkeRzoPf Marvin Gaye, "What's Going On"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=SUc8luH-I6c King Crimson, "Lizard", "Lizard"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=wPpQWyMjQ-s Rush, "2112"
=> https://audiotree.bandcamp.com/album/tricot-on-audiotree-live tricot, "On the Boom"/"18,19"/"Ochansensu-Su"/"Potage"/"Melon Soda"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=5qH2A5UXSds 八十八ヶ所巡礼, "金土日" ("Friday Saturday Sunday")
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=33X7VrRy5d4 INU, "メシ食うな！" ("Meshi Kuuna!")
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=cQhxmFsuAbY ターリン, "虫" (Stalin, "Mushi")
=> https://nyaa.si/view/1192434 Casiopea, "Casiopea"

I expect the beginning of the list will be more widely known than the rest so I won't comment on those.

tricot, a math rock band from Japan. Originally a girls trio from Kyoto, now a girls trio from Kyoto + drummer guy. Not as wild, and definitely not as "obscure", as the next band, but I just really like them. Wish I could buy all their albums! They're cool live too, very easy going.
I've tried learning "Melon Soda" on the bass -- the intro is pretty cool -- but I'm still not at that level (haven't practiced in ages tbh).

八十八ヶ所巡礼 -- smth like "pilgrimage of 88 places", not translatable I think -- what can I say, an alt/math rock thing, I wish I could buy all their albums too! First heard of them from a Japanese girl I met through my Japanese classes. The song choice is a bit arbitrary, they have different styles across albums that it's hard to choose something "representative".
The guitarist sounds like a monster. The drummer is an absolute beast, sick single bass pedal. And the bassist/vocalist is a god -- does he really only have 5 fingers?!
I think the drummer shows up shirtless in every video and live concert I've watched -- if you're into that. Bassist/Vocalist plays live in flip-flops and a dress -- oh no, now I'm confused -- über high-energy non-stop jumping around, must have 3 or 4 brains.

Impossible to choose any one song from "メシ食うな！" by INU, a "classic" punk album. Gotta listen to the whole thing from start to finish. I like that it's so happy-sounding but still sounds like a "true" punk album.

"虫" by Stalin is an awesome hardcode punk album. "泥棒" (Dorobou) is by far one of my favorite songs ever, likely my favorite by them, such a high-energy song, perfect to vent out. I sometimes wish I could sing it live but... you know, you need a band for that. I wish I could play it too, but I don't have the wrists :'(

"Casiopea" is probably the album I listened to most often since first discovering it 4+ years ago, it's tight AF.

## Honorable mentions

=> fecking_bahamas.gmi PAUS
=> https://americanfootball.bandcamp.com/track/silhouettes American Football, "American Football (LP3)", "Silhouettes"
=> https://morningteleportation.bandcamp.com/album/expanding-anyway Morning Teleportation, "Expanding Anyway"
=> https://nyaa.si/view/712487 Sakamoto Maaya & Cornelius, "あなたを保つもの"
=> https://thistownneedsguns.bandcamp.com/track/cat-fantastic This Town Needs Guns, "13.0.0.0.0", "Cat Fantastic"
=> https://vektor.bandcamp.com Vektor
=> https://vulfpeck.bandcamp.com Vulfpeck
=> https://yewtu.be/playlist?list=PLMpG-PjHShWmyKRQGM3KJR4rgKSuDVSs2 Mastodon, "Crack the Skye"
=> https://yewtu.be/playlist?list=PLwGe1l5pwo-4nhTf4iSySrcNc4BJ5UqP0 Flying Lotus, "You're Dead"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=GIuZUCpm9hc TOOL, "Forty Six & 2"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=SQNtGoM3FVU Jinjer, "Pisces"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=Xx30nA_AWVU José Cid, "10000 Anos Depois Entre Vénus e Marte"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=bAJ1WTGNISk Meshuggah, "Obzen", "Bleed"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=hqBjIolHUn4 Alan Sorrenti, "Aria"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=mpmtnLLZPcg 잠비나이, "Différance", "Connection"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=tcWu8LWHr_0 ヒカシュー, "20世紀の終わりに"
=> https://yewtu.be/watch?v=z70ch7cE8ak Gojira, "From Mars to Sirius"
