# just quotes
siiky
2020/05/26
2023/02/02

In no particular order.

====================

My transcription, possibly wrong:

> おい、君は先、羊飼いの犬だと言ったな。犬でいいじゃないか。いい犬は羊を豊な牧草地へ導くことで、羊から多いに感謝されることもあるさ。

影山、梶に、人間の條件 から

The subtitle's translation:

> Listen. So you think you'd just be a shepherd's dog. What's wrong with that? A good dog can lead the sheep to greener pastures and earn their gratitude.

Kageyama, to Kaji, from The Human Condition: No Greater Love

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/ja?%E4%BA%BA%E9%96%93%E3%81%AE%E6%A2%9D%E4%BB%B6_%28%E6%98%A0%E7%94%BB%29 Wikipedia (JP)
=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?The_Human_Condition_%28film_series%29 Wikipedia (EN)
=> https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0053114 IMDb

====================

> Everyone you will ever meet knows something you don't.

Bill Nye

====================

> He who knows best best knows how little he knows.

Thomas Jefferson

====================

> Lenina shook her head. "Was and will make me ill," she quoted, "I take a gramme and only am."

Lenina, from Brave New World, by Aldous Huxley

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Brave_New_World Wikipedia

====================

> It's the triumph of superior reason to live with folks who don't have any.

Socrates, from Socrates, by Voltaire

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Voltaire%27s_Socrates_%28play%29 Wikipedia
=> https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/4683 Project Gutenberg

====================

This one is somewhat longer, and it's not someone's or some character's quote,
but it's a good paragraph from a good book.

> "A New Theory of Biology" was the title of the paper which Mustapha Mond had just finished reading. He sat for some time, meditatively frowning, then picked up his pen and wrote across the title-page. "The author's mathematical treatment of the conception of purpose is novel and highly ingenious, but heretical and, so far as the present social order is concerned, dangerous and potentially subversive. _Not to be published_." He underlined the words. "The author will be kept under supervision. His transference to the Marine Biological Station of St Helena may become necessary." A pity, he thought, as he signed his name. It was a masterly piece of work. But once you began admitting explanations in terms of purpose -- well, you didn't know what the result might be. It was the sort of idea that might easily recondition the more unsettled minds among the higher castes -- make them lose their faith in happiness as the Sovereign Good and take to believing, instead, that the goal was somewhere beyond, somewhere outside of the present human sphere; that the purpose of life was not the maintenance of well-being, but some intensification and refining of consciousness, some enlargement of knowledge. Which was, the Controller reflected, quite possibly true. But not, in the present circumstances, admissible. He picked up his pen again, and under the words _"Not to be published"_ drew a second line, thicker and blacker than the first; then sighed. "What fun it would be," he thought, "if one didn't have to think about happiness!"

From Brave New World, by Aldous Huxley

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Brave_New_World Wikipedia

====================

> The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from man to pig, and from pig to man again; but already it was impossible to say which was which.

From Animal Farm, by George Orwell

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Animal_Farm Wikipedia
=> https://gutenberg.net.au/plusfifty-n-z.html#orwell Project Gutenberg Australia

====================

> God's power we allow is infinite: But neither man nor any other animal are happy: Therefore he does not will their happiness. His wisdom is infinite: He is never mistaken in choosing the means to any end: But the course of nature tends not to human or animal felicity: Therefore it is not established for that purpose. Through the whole compass of human knowledge, there are no inferences more certain and infallible than these. In what respect, then, do his benevolence and mercy resemble the benevolence and mercy of men?

From Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, by David Hume

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Problem_of_evil#Atheistic_viewpoint Wikipedia

====================

> 6.371: At the basis of the whole modern view of the world lies the illusion that the so-called laws of nature are the explanations of natural phenomena.

From Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, by Ludwig Wittgenstein

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Tractatus_Logico-Philosophicus Wikipedia
=> https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/ludwig-wittgenstein/tractatus-logico-philosophicus/c-k-ogden Standard Ebooks

====================

> If one desires to be happy, sir, one must never understand duty; for, as soon as one has comprehended it, it is implacable.

Jean Valjean to Marius Pontmercy, from Les Misérables, by Victor Hugo

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Les_Misérables Wikipedia
=> https://standardebooks.org/ebooks/victor-hugo/les-miserables/isabel-f-hapgood Standard Ebooks

====================

> Floki:
>   This is your fault, Ragnar.
>   Torstein has died fighting for a hill he did not want to own. For something which meant nothing to him. He has died a pointless death.
>   How many more of us must die for your Christians? Or have you, in your heart, already renounced our gods and turned to the Christ God? Is that what your friend Athelstan has persuaded you to do?
>   But look. Here we are. Under an English sky. Burying our dead. Those we have sacrificed for Jesus Christ.
>
> Ragnar:
>   We're all fated to die on a certain day, yes? But it is our own choice to do as we please until that day comes.
>   I did not force Torstein, or any of you, to come, for that matter. You all chose to be here.
>   My heart is as heavy for Torstein as anyone's, but I am sure that I will bump into him again soon.
>   And in the meantime, Floki, shut your face.

Floki and Ragnar, from Vikings S03E03.

Right before Floki says "But look.", after asking "Is that what (...) Athelstan has persuaded you to do?", Ragnar made him a funny face, like "wtf are you talking about?" After Ragnar was finished talking Floki looked convinced and trust restored.

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Vikings_(TV_series) Wikipedia
=> https://www.imdb.com/title/tt2306299 IMDb
