# an interesting tiny nothing here

Random tiny thoughts that don't merit their own full-sized posts.

author: @siiky
license: CC BY-SA 4.0

## 2022-07-28 11:03 +0100
A fren recommended me this video just now.
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=P9Q3crLWQY8 How the Frogs Cooked Dinner
I'll let you ponder on it yourself.

## 2022-07-28 09:13 +0100
Got my first comment on something I wrote! Exciting times we live in! Left me wondering if I've been losing on it all this time for not having setup an easier means of contact before...
=> https://lists.sr.ht/~siiky/public/%3C87ilniavws.fsf%40cassilda.carcosa.net%3E

## 2022-07-06 01:23 +0100
Found the other day's song, and it wasn't Carolina Deslandes:
=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=PSmbg9y4BgE "Mais ou Menos Isto", by Rita Rocha
Apparently she won The Voice Kids Portugal...? Faugh!

## 2022-07-04 01:02 +0100
I finally got my paid SourceHut subscription! From today I'll be (slowly) moving my stuff away from GitHub, starting with ipfs.scm and my website.
The website will be hosted on SourceHut Pages, that also supports Gemini! I already started working on converting my so very complexicated webshite into a lean and simple(r) Gemini capsule. Still have some quirks to think about (how to make it available in HTML form, because of links), but should be up soon enough! Only the math-heavy posts will be a real PITA :/
Coincidentally, I learned of GiveUpGitHub after getting the subscription...
=> https://sourcehut.org
=> https://git.sr.ht/~siiky/ipfs.scm ipfs.scm
=> gemini://srht.site SourceHut Pages (Gemini)
=> https://srht.site SourceHut Pages (HTTP)
=> https://sfconservancy.org/GiveUpGitHub

## 2022-06-29 23:21 +0100
I'm completely against current DRM systems, but some time ago I thought of a valid (IMO) use case for a proper implementation (before that I held "DRM-free good, DRM bad" in my mind as a truism).
If you share digital content with someone (a photo, some text, w.e.), they can technically do whatever they want with it. Maybe you're OK with that, but if you eventually become unOK, there's nothing you can technically do to deny them future access. With a proper DRM system this should be possible. I was reminded of this by a couple of posts I read recently:
=> gemini://gemini.circumlunar.space/users/solderpunk/gemlog/low-budget-p2p-content-distribution-with-git.gmi Solderpunk, Low budget P2P content distribution with git
=> gemini://alexschroeder.ch/page/2018-06-29_No_Take_Back Alex Schröder, No take back

## 2022-06-29 10:50 +0100
The other day I heard some pop song on the radio (note-se: because I was forced to). It was almost like any other shitty pop song that goes on the radio, but it had a flair to it you don't usually hear in pop; it had a weird sequence of notes, almost dissonant. Now, I would never in general be in favor of shit music. But if this one is popular enough to result in people listening to more weird (and better) music, that's a good thing! So this song is good (though still not a good song). I don't know the song's name, but I'm almost 100% sure it was by Carolina Deslandes.

## 2022-06-23 13:47 +0100
I use card-like pieces (train/subway tickets) as markers for places I want to transcribe or take notes from physical books, but I never write right away what the marker is for, so I forget often when it's time to type into Org Roam.
Yesterday I thought a teeny tiny A7 notebook per book may be a good alternative, and ~1yr ago I learned how to manually bind books -- very simple method, single-signature only, not at all polished: a single A4 sheet of paper cut into 4 A6 sheets, and each A6 sheet folded in half: 16 A7 pages of readily available paper estate! Just made one in ~10min: 2 holes at about 3cm from the top and bottom margin, thread with a needle 3/4 times, knot.
Has the downside of needing a pencil/pen at all times, but it's so slim it can be used as a book marker too.

## 2022-06-23 01:51 +0100
Wrote a oneliner to get a (I think valid) Gemfeed out of all my input files, ordered by the date each was last edited according to git log, complete with title and all -- the first line of all my files is the title, be they Markdown, Org, or Gemtext, and luckily for me the line starts with some sort of tag, some space, and then the title.
Here it is:
```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash
find */ -type f \( -iname '*.md' -or -iname '*.org' -or -iname '*.gmi' \) |
while read file; do
  # Get the last commit
  date="$(git log -1 -- "$file" |
    grep ^Date: |
    # Extract the year, month and day of the month
    sed 's|^Date:\s\+[A-Z][a-z]\{2\} \([A-Z][a-z]\{2\}\) \([0-9]\+\) \([0-9]\{2\}:[0-9]\{2\}\):[0-9]\{2\} \([0-9]\{4\}\) \([-+][0-9]\{4\}\)$|\4-\1-0\2|;' |
    # Git's outputted date doesn't 0-pad DoM, but I do on the bit above; e.g. 023 => 23; 07 => 07
    sed 's|0\([0-9]\{2\}\)$|\1|;' |
    sed 's|Jan|01|; s|Feb|02|; s|Mar|03|; s|Apr|04|; s|May|05|; s|Jun|06|; s|Jul|07|; s|Aug|08|; s|Sep|09|; s|Oct|10|; s|Nov|11|; s|Dec|12|;')"
  echo -e "$date\t$file"
done |
sort -nr |
while read date file; do
  # The sed command removes the formatting and spaces of the beginning of the line, leaving the title
  title="$(head -1 "$file" | sed 's|^[^ ]*[ ]*||;')"
  echo "=> $file $date - $title"
done
```
Fucking dope!

## 2022-06-22 20:21 +0100
Just some minutes ago, due to a conversation on #chicken, I realized why foldl and foldr evaluate to different values when using cons as the folder: cons is not associative! One of those things that's obvious but you never think about.

## 2022-06-22 20:19 +0100
Command to generate tinylog dates:
```sh
date +'%F %R %z'
```
To use with Vim:
```
r!date +'\%F \%R \%z'
```

## 2022-06-18 10:00 +0100
On the train reading a book realized why it is that aerobic organisms, like humans, have a significantly shorter life-span than anaerobic organisms, like trees. I had known for a long time that it's oxygen that ages us (we literally oxidate), just never made the connection before.
