# Donating
@siiky
2022/02/01
2022/07/08

What if there was a way to force oneself to donate?

Donating to projects you use, enjoy, or believe in, is a way to help ensure their sustainability. However, for some reason that I haven't figured out yet, it's hard to get going. Won't try to speak for anyone else, but as for me, there's always a what if, such as, what if I had donated to this instead of that? what if this turns out to be evil?

My mom, who earns in a month less than me by half, used to donate more than me. I can't believe I'm unique in that; I'm sure there are many people out there that can donate (have the monetary power) but don't.

Think of everything that you use or have used for free, think only of things that are distributed freely by their creators and that you haven't paid for nor donated to; realize that it took effort to create it, and that otherwise, e.g. with a book or a movie, you'd have to pay for it somewhere; given that you haven't paid for it, it should be obvious that you're committing "theft". Theft is probably on everyone's naughty list; assuming that we are and/or want to be ethical, then it's something to avoid.

I understand that this is so oversimplified it almost couldn't be at all helpful. And I'm sure I've overlooked many aspects of the whole situation.

But this isn't supposed to be some very deep philosophical thinking. It's just a bit of rhetoric to try and convince people to donate to things they enjoy and would like to keep afloat.

Using rhetoric to improve people... I bet Plato didn't see that coming!

=> https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/1672 Plato, "Gorgias"
