# WIP Disgust for society
siiky
2023/01/10
2023/01/14
en

The Tai Chi master said happiness is found when there are no restrains (unnatural ones) forced down upon us. By this definition it is simply impossible to be happy this "civilized" society. Everyday billions of people wake up, get up, and get ready for their new day of taking crap from others because "that's life!"

Tiny conveniences are trouted as great achievements and advances, possible only because of the ivilized society. Yet the huge inconveniences (to put it mildly) are overlooked. People think life's great because they have access to an overpriced and slowly rotting inside box they call a house; they think that indeed they're better off in life than those savages the indians, the aborigenes, the pagans, ... who live in tents. Surely, they ARE better off than those who don't know what is work, mortgages, loans, the colossal monetary gap between the majority and the barely out of the shit pit; they who don't know empathy and can't tell apart good from bad, they're better off than the ones who don't have to pay (save for respect) for water, piped or bottled up from distant lands, because they drink it from a clean nearby river or plants all year round.

They don't worry about food and "better" ways of "producing" it, because they don't overeat either.

The civilized sayd that working is worth the spare time they have later; and they praise the god science and technology for extending their miserable sick lives for another 30~40 years when, in truth, they don't realize it's been shortened for about 10, and forgot to do the rest of the math: 47*365*(5/7)*8/(24*364)=11.19 years.

Going easy on these numbers, leaning towards the civilized: one should take into account we sleep less; we worry more; we eat more (and A LOT of junk); we breathe dead dinosaurs (because it's better to move in massive metal boxes than to walk); we plaster our bodies with synthetic crap because that's gonna somehow improve our QoL; we don't have who to talk to because that would be showing weakness; we have our instincts repressed collectively because of a millenial work of fiction; ...

Golly am I glad to be alive in this great era!
