# Societal slavery
siiky
2023/03/19
2023/04/16
en

Society seems to run as some kind of megaslavery system. Depending on the POV, it's not quite as bad as actual slavery some mere centuries ago: the majority of us don't work in back-breaking conditions, we're not (as) starved, we're not whipped, we have some sort of "dignity" (whatever this word means), and health is also mostly improved (apart from the usual suspects: cancer, sleep deprivation, obesity, diabetes, ... that I guess are kinda recent "inventions" but not sure).

The most obvious common aspect is the lack of freedom. Both now and then, "you go to work for me right now or else...!" The whip, as mentioned, is "not real", not literal. We're more civilized now, after all. The whole scheme is slightly different. It works more like a carrot & stick. The things you (think you) want are the carrot. And the stick is this magic thing that is extended as much as you don't have the means to obtain the carrot.

There are things that we geniunely need, obio: air, water, food, shelter, ... Air we mostly get for free (in varying quality). Depending on where you live, you can get drinkable (or not) water for free or not. Shelter and food is a different story. It is possible to grow your own food and be more independent thus. But that would go against the scheme this society[^0] is built on. For this society it's more beneficial if people are dumb and can't become independent. Because of it, no effort is spent instructing society members on this sort of skill.

Money, the "silly paper" (as my boss put it), is the language of this civilized society. Everyone understands money, all of the different dialects. So in this society, money is the carrot-obtainium and the carrot can be anything that you can exchange for money. Even the essential needs (such as food and shelter). In fact, you're mostly expected to get food and shelter in exchange for money.

We shorten the stick through work, you already know that. The thing is, the general population will never ever have a short enough stick that we can stop worrying about food, shelter, and the other necessities. Everyone is kept at that "just enough" level, so that we don't have to worry about it at all times, but not enough so that we can go for any extended periods of time without worrying. And this is how "work or else" is enforced. Nobody (generally, I expect) is explicitly told that, true. But saying that you're not forced to work is a sort of sick joke and in bad taste.

One resulting problem is that we've lived in this state for so long that work has become one of the "necessities" -- "of course you have to work!" If you say "oh I wish I didn't have work" (in fact, you don't), it's likely you'll hear someone next to say "I know, but is one to do?" That's if you're lucky, otherwise you'll hear "get over it, everone has to work, how are you gonna get food, a house, ...?" Don't listen. It's not that they're irremediable idiots or anything like that. It's more like they don't believe any other way of life is possible, and they'll only kill your mood and any resemblance of hope with their replies. And it's not even that they mean you ill: given what they believe in, it's the only reply they can reasonably give!

And the other problem is that almost everyone is in a figurative hamster wheel -- the majority not even aware of it. We get a carrot in exchange for a more extended stick. We want a new carrot now, so we work to shorten the stick. Loop. Some are in a worse situation than others: they work so that they can work more, they can never shorten the stick enough to rest a little. And worse of all are those in that situation and aware of it. I can't help but think that this meaningless loop is part of the reason some commit suicide.

It follows almost directly: if freedom was a measurable property of the physical Universe, money would be its SI unit[^1]. And from that it most naturally follows that good monetary practices are an indispensable skill for the free(-to-be) citizen of this society. It isn't an easily acquired skill, and there are inumerous traps layed out across the land waiting for you to fall into, just like a pack of hunters each patiently waiting for prey. But you can practice and with some effort improve your situation.

At the heart of it I believe is frugality. I truly believe this is the single most important objective of all, not only for monetary freedom. And after that, recognizing traps and practicing their avoidance as much as feasible. Being anti-social is a must (I'll try to explain).

First, some of the traps. At some point in time, it became generally socially acceptable to con every citizen (as many and as much as possible), as long as it's within the "Law"[^2]. For example, everyone knows "teleshopping" is a bad idea. Even though it's legal, "the first 10 to call get this  amazing discombobulator for free with their Samurai Plus[^3]" is a trap and you know it. Everyone knows it. Why? We've learned it with time: if it sounds too good to be true, it probably is! And we've learned to avoid this one too (I hope you have). Personally, I can't help but laugh at and mock those ridiculous ads.

Probably the largest kind of trap operation we've set ourselves into is "special occasions": You played your first concert, let's celebrate! You "earned" your first job, let's celebrate! You got your first paycheck, let's celebrate! It's my/your/our Nth X anniversary, ...! We're having a baby, ...! We're getting married, ...! We got married, ...! You passed the exam, ...! You graduated, ...! It's Easter, ...! It's Christmas, ...! It's New Year's, ...! It's father's day, ...! It's mother's day, ...! It's women's day, ...! It's Valentine's day, ...!

Give me a break! Some day we'll be celebrating waking up, breathing, and taking a shit...

I have absolutely nothing against celebrating any of these occasions. I've celebrated many more minor events than these. It's how we're supposed to celebrate, according to norm and convention of this society (which necessarily involves extending the stick as much as possible), that's the problem. My advice is to be as anti-social[^4] as you feasibly can. You DO NOT need to spend money to show an appreciation to your dad/mom/significant other, or your family during Christmas -- scientists say. Believe me, it's true -- I have the authority of a scientist, and next year of an engineer too!

Another large set of traps is the necessities. Everyone needs a car, good and very varied clothes and shoes, a shitton of creams/lotions and other shit to pollute your body with, the best iShit phone of today (can't be yesterday's, nonono), a house (so motherfucking big you could lodge a whole small village some couple hundred years ago), and of course I wouldn't forget, to travel and to be cultured. I say you don't need any of these. None.

If you can avoid these traps you're well on your way to be free. Really free. With some effort, striving to be more independent and self-reliant, you'll be able one day to stop turning and to step off the wheel and catch your breath; not just to hear but to listen to the birds chirping and the still water moving; not just to look up at the sky but to see it, and to see the flowers blooming, the wagtails wagging their tails, the swallows gliding, the blackbirds hopping, and the eagles spying; to smell the pine trees, the eucalyptuses, ...; not just to hold and touch with your hands but to feel your dog's and/or cat's fluffy hair, the bark of the trees, and the soft humid moss.

And then you'll know you're free.


[^0] I explicitly say "this society" (several times) to get this very important point across: this society is NOT the only way that humans can live, or have lived, in community.

[^1] Implicit is the fact that SI units are an invention of this society.

[^2] It's almost like "Law" was the (in)formal codification of the norms and conventions of this society.

[^3] I couldn't find a video of the scene I was thinking of in Spanish, only in English but ew, gross! If you haven't yet, I recommend watching the 2019 film "El hoyo", it's great.

=> https://www.imdb.com/title/tt8228288
=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?The_Platform_(film)

[^4] Being "anti-social" does not mean to not socialize with others; it means to go against norm and convention of this society, or at the very least, to not go along it.


## Inspirations of this post

These are the books I feel have a stronger/more obvious connection (alphabetically):

* "Brave New World" -- meaningless loop of life and how twisted this society is (see quotes);
* "Budgeting 101" -- frugality and getting (financially) off the wheel;
* "Gorgias" -- there is a difference between right and wrong, between good and bad, between being and appearing to be, between a physician and a cook (the best possible example of the "need" vs "want" distinction), and that each person has the (natural rather than legal) right and duty to choose between the two;
* "Les Misérables" -- duty and how it's like (see quote next);
* "Sex at Dawn" -- opening my eyes to different kinds of liberties that were taken from us, how, and why, and for exposing me to different kinds of societies;
* "Tao Te Ching" -- what really matters, what's natural, and how to behave naturally, i.e., according to nature;
* "Walden" -- expresses in words what I think, feel, and like about "the outdoors" (the fact that this expression exists is a sign to me that this society is fucked).

=> ../wiki/books.gmi

This quote from "Les Misérables":

> If one desires to be happy, sir, one must never understand duty; for, as soon as one has comprehended it, it is implacable.

=> ../words/quotes.gmi

This video I watched in December with a "quote" from "Zhuangzi":

> The ideal life is this: you live in a small village, you live around family and friends, and you have everything you need, you have everything you want. And then sometimes, if you go on a stroll, you can walk out at the edge of the village, and if you listen really hard you can hear the chickens from the village next to you, but never in your life do you actually feel like you ever need to go to that village, and you might forever be in the village you came up in.

=> https://invidious.snopyta.org/watch?v=VcHW0mpi9y8&t=28m30s Luke Smith, "The Return to Normalcy"
=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Zhuangzi_(book) "Zhuangzi"

Some chats with a friend about "Early Retirement Extreme" (they've read the book, I haven't yet).

=> gemini://gemi.dev/cgi-bin/wp.cgi/view/en?Jacob_Lund_Fisker
=> https://earlyretirementextreme.com

And of course, my own life experience. I'm getting sick of having to work... even though I started only ~4 years ago!

=> ../philosophy/flexibility-life.gmi Flexibility & Life
=> ../psychology/fagots.gmi Fagots
=> ../books/bill_gates.how_to_avoid_a_climate_disaster.gmi Bill Gates, "How to Avoid a Climate Disaster"

=> ../wiki/notrelated.gmi "Not Related!" S02E06

=> ../words/quotes § 2023-05-10, "Who Am I?"

## Post scriptum

With this above text alone I really can't express my true disgust for a lot of this society. There's so much more to it that I can't begin to explain even to myself, let alone to someone else in spoken or written words...

And when I try (e.g. this post) I invariably think it turned out cheesy... hurgh!
