# Overpass
@siiky
2022/03/26

Overpass is an interface used to query OSM data. Overpass Turbo is an Overpass web client you can use to query OSM data, export it, &c.

Some links:

=> https://overpass-turbo.eu Overpass Turbo
=> https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_turbo Overpass Turbo (OSM Wiki)
=> https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API/Overpass_QL Overpass Query Language
=> https://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/Overpass_API Overpass API

## Useful Queries

This is a list of useful queries I've learned over time.

### Features last modified by an user

Nodes, ways, or relations last modified by "user name":

```
nwr(user:"user name")({{bbox}});
out body;
```

### Features modified between two dates

Node, way, or relation amenities modified between 2022-02-04T00:00:00Z and "to-date":

```
// to-date is optional and defaults to now
[diff:"2022-02-04T00:00:00Z","to-date"];
nwr["amenity"]({{bbox}});
out body;
```

### Features around other features

Picnic sites within a 1km radius of restaurants with takeaway:

```
node[amenity=restaurant][takeaway=yes]({{bbox}});
node(around:1000)[tourism=picnic_site];
out body;
```

### Features inside some area object

Libraries in Portugal:

```
nwr["amenity"="library"](area:3600295480);
out body;

// Or:

area(3600295480)->.searchArea;
(nwr["amenity"="library"](area.searchArea););
out body;
>;
out skel qt;
```

I don't understand the difference between the two yet, but the latter is supposed to be more correct. All I know is that >; makes the query recursive (whatever that means).

Found on StackOverflow an explanation of the area:XXX:

> If the polygon you want to query inside of is an OSM feature, you can also query using an area ID.
>
> Area IDs are generated by the Overpass server to make querying data within existing polygons easier. You can determine the area ID for a way by adding 2400000000 to the way ID and the area ID for a relation by adding 3600000000 to the relation ID (assuming that the way or relation is a valid area feature).

=> https://stackoverflow.com/a/65982945

I found Portugal's relation object, which is the relation 295480, and 3600000000+295480=3600295480.

=> https://www.openstreetmap.org/relation/295480
