% Credit
% siiky
% 2020/04/30

**DISCLAIMER:** This post has nothing to do with me or [CVE-2020-26935].

There are some types of work or achievements at work that can be credited
directly to one person or small group of people. I don't mean fixing bugs or
developing some new fancy useless feature, but, for example, a new
revolutionary algorithm, protocol, or cryptographic system. This may or may not
be a part of their job. Sometimes a white paper about the novelty is written
and published; and sometimes it isn't. In either case, it is not uncommon for
the matter to break out on news and social media sites. The titles usually go
something like "_\<company\>_ does _\<big thing\>_". Is this right?

A few months ago news with a title somewhat similar to the above broke out, and
the company was the one I work for. It was really big news, and all thanks to
the work of a group of two or three people in the company. Not anyone else.
What name is mentioned in the title? The _company_'s. Who did the work? The
nameless group inside the company.

One day, at lunch, the topic came up because of something the leader of that
small group said in an interview, when asked "What are your comments about
_\<company\>_ having done _\<big thing\>_?": "Has it?". This coming up, almost
at once, everyone got up (figuratively), as if someone had insulted _\<personal
deity\>_ inside _\<designated place of worship of said deity\>_. And I just
really don't get it. Why would anyone think it's right to credit the _company_
instead of the people who've actually done something? How can a _company_, not
being a being, not possessing of reason, not being able to take an action, not
being able to affect the real physical world, possibly accomplish anything?

Maybe I'm being a bit harsh on companies, but I believe crediting something or
someone for something it or they haven't done is not right. I would say, if
anything, the only credit _"companies"_ deserve is for doing _**The Right Thing
(TM)**_ and investing on someone competent and deserving of remuneration.

/rant

All companies not mentioned in this post are fictious, not real, and any
resemblance to any other also not real companies is purely coincidental.

[CVE-2020-26935]: CVE-2020-26935.html
