# RE: Brain Fart
siiky
2022-08-21
2022-08-21

I just read these posts by ew0k and really they hit the spot... Added to the reclog of today.

=> gemini://warmedal.se/~bjorn/posts/2022-08-18-brain-fart.gmi Brain Fart
=> gemini://warmedal.se/~bjorn/posts/2021-12-17-do-you-ever-feel-stuck-in-a-loop.gmi Do You Ever Feel Stuck in a Loop?
=> gemini://warmedal.se/~bjorn/posts/2022-04-28-no-you-don-t-have-time-for-another-project.gmi No, You Don't Have Time For Another Project
=> ../reclog.gmi Reclog

> It's just that I have all these ideas that I'd like to deliver on.
>
> But at the same time I have neither the time nor the energy to take any of them on, frankly.
>
> You'd think I'd learned by now, but no.

> Stuck in a loop, having a hard time breaking out.

> There's never time. Maybe you feel like you'll have time, so you start something today. It'll just be a few hours this week and then it's done.

I could quote almost the whole thing verbatim in here and just say "this ^".

I can relate 100% with them. I'm like a squirrel chasing new nuts every 5 seconds, almost as if the nuts I catch rot by the touch. It's completely irrational to take on so many things simultaneously, and yet, here we are. I have more than 4 ongoing books for some reason. I haven't read a single word of any of them for the past... 2 weeks? Maybe more? Shiet...

=> ../books/list.gmi Books list

I'm honestly surprised I've been able to keep at it on the Petri nets. Fingers crossed it continues that way because I think they'll be key to getting some new doors open.

=> ../petri_nets/logs.gmi Petri nets logs

And the cherry on top: all the while I feel bad for putting other things to the side (in no particular order):

* OSM editing
* ARM64 Salmonella machine for CHICKEN
* alist-let
* save-for-later (a project I really would like to get done but feels daunting)
* Books I still haven't finished
* Books I still haven't started
* Learning some basic survival skills
* Topics I still haven't read about
* (Natural) languages: haven't practiced my Japanese in a long while and I've stopped the Language Transfer Greek course at least 3 times now
* (Programming) languages: Erlang, Elixir, Rust, Go, Common Lisp, Idris, FORTH, ...

The list could go on and on for a really long time. I have literally hundreds of tabs open on Firefox of things that I at some point wanted to read but didn't have the time at the time. To put it in scale: I use one of those sidetabs plugins; the scrollbar is about the size of a tab; one screenful of tabs is 29 tabs; so I have roughly 29²=841 open tabs.

=> zettelkasten_utility.gmi As I've said before, I may be a hoarder...

(BTW ew0k, in case you read this, some of the links in those pages seem to be broken)
